\begin{techreport}
\section{On White Boxes}\seclabel{Discussion}
In \secref{WatProvSpecs}, we saw how easy it is to write shims for a variety of
common black box components. In return for this modest investment, \fluent{}
allows programmers to ask and answer debugging questions that span node
boundaries and involve mutable state that changes over time. It is tempting to
ask if we can take the idea further. If our components are written in a
language amenable to provenance collection---if we work only with ``white
boxes''---can we infer their \watprovenance{} specifications automatically? Or,
better still, can we obtain a form of provenance even richer than
\watprovenance{}: one that explains not just \emph{which} input tuples
contribute to an output tuple, but also precisely \emph{how}?

Unfortunately, automatically extracting \watprovenance{} remains elusive, even
for state machines written in a restricted white-box language for provenance.
Take for example provenance-enhanced distributed logic programming languages
such as NDLog~\cite{loo2006design} and Dedalus~\cite{alvaro2011dedalus} that
store system state in relations and represent programs as collections of
relational queries. Each exposes a form of \whyprovenance{} that accounts for
state that changes over time. In an NDLog program, effect-producing
events---such as the addition, deletion, or update of records---are reified
into the program's provenance graph. In Dedalus, logical time is reified into
all of the tuples.

These custom representations of provenance in time, while not formalized, are
similar in spirit to \watprovenance{}. It turns out, however, that they are
\emph{not} equivalent to \watprovenance{}---neither Dedalus nor NDLog
provenance necessarily identify minimal witnesses. The underlying issue is the
problem of \defword{negative provenance} or the provenance of
non-answers~\cite{chapman2009whynot,huang2008nonanswers}, which remains an open
issue in the database research community.

\newcommand{\kvset}{\text{set}}
\newcommand{\kvget}{\text{get}}
\newcommand{\freeze}{\text{freeze}}
\newcommand{\trunc}{\text{trunc}}

Consider the key-value state machine presented in \exampleref{WatExampleKvs},
extended to support two new requests. The freeze request makes the existing set
of keys and values immutable, while trunc deletes all of the keys and values
(provided that freeze has not already been called). Now consider the trace
\[
  T = a_1 a_2 a_3 = \kvset(x,1); \freeze; \trunc
\]
The \watprovenance{} of $i = \kvget(x)$ is the singleton set $\set{a_1a_2}$
consisting of the single witness $a_1a_2$. But explaining why $a_2$ is part of
this witness requires reasoning about negative provenance: $x$ had the value
$1$ both because of $a_1$ (which inserted the value into the store) and because
$a_3$ had \emph{no effect} (due to the action of $a_2$, \emph{without which}
$a_3$ would have removed the effects of $a_1$!). If the state machine was
written in a language such as NDLog or Dedalus, implementing it would require
the use of logical negation to capture the reasoning that trunc applies only if
freeze \emph{does not exist} before it.  (In fact, \exampleref{WatExampleXyx}
through \exampleref{WatExampleSetDiff} all require nonmonotonic logic.)
Explanations of the output to $i$ would therefore require both positive and
negative provenance. Explaining why a particular event \emph{did not occur} is
intractable in general, as the explanation may be infinitely large.  Existing
techniques for collecting negative provenance apply heuristics that
over-approximate the why provenance of non-answers. For example, Dedalus
provenance would determine that the provenance of $i$ is $\set{a_1a_2a_3}$.

\newcommand{\dedalusplus}{Dedalus$^+$}
We could, of course, constrain the white-box programming language to rule out
the complication of negative provenance.  The language
\dedalusplus~\cite{marczak2012confluence} is the positive fragment of Dedalus,
in which negation is not permitted (except on base relations). Programs written
in \dedalusplus{} generate positive \whyprovenance{} graphs whose leaves
correspond exactly with the \watprovenance{} of the given execution.
Unfortunately, \dedalusplus{} is not adequately expressive to implement
arbitrary stateful distributed services. The CALM
theorem~\cite{alvaro2011consistency,ameloot2013transducers} shows that programs
produce a single consistent output under all input orders if and only if those
programs do not use negation in their logic. Therefore programs whose outputs
are (by definition) dependent upon their input orders---such as mutable
key/value stores, file systems and object stores, caches, etc---cannot be
implemented in a logic language \emph{without} using negation! Negative
provenance is requirement for capturing the semantics of typical stateful
services.

In short, fully automatic collection of \watprovenance{} for general-purpose
systems seems tricky. As future work, we plan to continue efforts to design of
an expressive programming language for which we can automatically extract
\watprovenance{} with a minimum of programmer assistance.
\end{techreport}
